# Introduction

In recent years `Node` is a technology which has taken the world by storm. Many companies (including the one i work for) have transitioned away from the popularity of older server side technologies in order to coagulate the experience of their developers into a single point, where all devs are able to work on all parts of the project, giving smaller teams more hands on deck for larger problems which may occur. Of course, this is not the only reason. Yes, `Node` has enabled the use of `JavaScript` server side, opened the doors to back end development to more front end developers, but there is far more to `Node` than just expanding our team, and increasing efficiency, though these are notable improvements.

I started my own journey in `Node` rather recently, first using it in a professional capacity as of January this year (2022) (one could say I was pretty late to the party). I initially began my role primarily as a `PHP` developer, building a `RESTful API`, which eventually transitioned into some work on the `React` frontend, and then further into a more fullstack role on a different project. Having always had the goal in mind of becoming a generalist software engineer I enjoy learning concepts and feeling my way through the code of any language I turn to. `Node` has made this exploration far easier by allowing me to focus on `JavaScript`, a language which I had little experience with prior, in doing so this provides a good grounding for branching into concepts and moving into other languages too. Having a goto language with which you can experiment allows you to experiment with both front and back end concepts in a simple environment. `Node` also helps to prevent the usual "brain overlap" we often get when jumping between multiple syntaxes on a single project. Personally, I have found `Node` to have a low barrier to entry, or in the words of [Nolan Bushnell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nolan_Bushnell) <em>"Easy to learn but hard to master"</em>, this makes `Node` an incredibly rewarding tool, which has also helped personally in my understanding of much deeper (lower level) concepts.

So what is the goal here? why do I write this? I write this not only as a guide for you dear reader, but for my own fundamental understanding, to paraphrase a quote from one of the greatest minds of the (recently) modern era <em>"If you can't explain it simply, you don't know it well enough"</em>. As such, I have made it my goal for each concept, tool, or language, I learn to be able to explain it clearly to my colleagues and peers, as and when it is needed, in the most simplistic manner possible, hopefully, enabling others to understand them better in the process. As such, if you are reading this, you are my guinea pig, please, do hold me to account and call out any inconsistencies in these documents it will help my own learning as well as others, you can submit corrections for review, and point me to alternative resources if you have them. Remember, the best way to learn is to `understand` not to `imitate`, we need know not only `how` to do something but `why` we are doing it, les  we only develop use of such knowledge under a specific context. Should be then be taken out of such context, the knowledge becomes utterly useless, my advice to avoid this pitfall; force yourself to use what you want your learn, do it the hard way, and you will remember and learn so much more. So, without further ado, lets get into `Node`!

___

<div align="right">

[<< prev](../README.md) | [next >>](./2_node.md)
