# JS - Short and Fast Rules

There is no easy route to programming, no magic formulae which will make you an expert engineer, but there are methods which can assist. However, learning as much as you can will help, experimenting will help, and understanding the rules will help. As such, here are some of the fast and hard rules which you can apply to improve your code, there are exceptions to the rules, and not everyone may agree with them, but these are rules which I have found helpful for writing cleaner code, that is, code which is readable, maintainable, and legible. Legibility and readability are two differing concepts, code may be readable but illegible, legibility is to do with how easy code is to understand, generally we want a balance of the two. As such, it is important to understand that these rules are based on a premise proposed by [Douglas Crockford](https://www.amazon.co.uk/JavaScript-language-Pristine-Revision-Chinese/dp/B0097CON2S/ref=sr_1_2?crid=AX7L002T333P&keywords=Douglas+Crockford&qid=1667852238&sprefix=douglas+crockford%2Caps%2C352&sr=8-2) to paraphrase; "<em>JS has some good parts, some bad parts, and some awful parts</em>" the idea being to avoid the awful and bad parts and only use the good parts, much like building anything else, constructing artefacts from bad parts will lead to a bad artefact.

1. Avoid Global Variables - Possibly the worst part of JS is it's dependence on Global Variables, they make it difficult to run independent sub-programs (pretty much the whole premise of functional programming), atop of this JS automatically creates a global variable if they are declared without a keyword. This can create bugs which are hard to trace and debug, not only this but it can create unseen connections throughout any point of the app. Avoid declaring global variables.

2. Declare Variables at The Top - In most C-like languages we declare variables within our block scopes. This is because most C-like languages privatize our variables to our scopes. Whilst JS borrows the C block syntax it does not have a block scope, due to this it is better to declare variables at the top of our functions in JS rather than the C standard of declaring them at the site of their first use. This ties into our execution contexts when running functions as JS does have function scopes. Declare variables at the top of your functions.

3. Use Semicolons - As many beginners know JS has a mechanism for automatically inserting semicolons at the end of a statement. This means that you don't actually "need" a semicolon for JS to run, however, this mechanism is unreliable and can mask larger errors, never rely on it. It may insert semicolons in places we don't want them, it can even void some statements causing them to return "undefined". Don't rely on semicolon insertion. Use Semicolons.

4. Avoid Reserved Words - JS has many reserved words, some of which aren't even used in the language, but, we should avoid using them in our code where possible. This is because when we use these words as keys  they must be quoted, hence, we render ourselves unable to use dot syntax. Avoid Reserved Words.

5. Be wary of `typeof` - The `typeof` operator returns a string which identifies the type of it it's operand, as the name suggests. If we conduct `typeof null` however, notice that the value returned is `object`. A better test for `null` is to use the equality operator `===`. Typeof also cannot distinguish between `null` and `objects`. In such a case you need to combine checking the `object` value (Objects are truthy values) and the expectant `null` value as `null` is falsy. `NaN` is also problematic as `NaN` is indeed a number, an `Object` is of type function and so on. Some implementations may also disagree on the type of `regex` objects. Be wary when using `typeof`.

6. Always Provide the Radix to parseInt - `ParseInt` is a useful utility, it converts a string into an integer. It can take a number string such as `1` or a string including a number such as `1 cm`. It is worth noting that the function itself does not take any note of the additional text, and it stops parsing at the first nondigit. If the first character of a string is `0` it will be evaluated in base `8` rather than the default base `10` unless we manually provide the `radix`. This is particularly problematic when parsing dates. Thus, to avoid problems, always provide the `radix` to `parseInt`.

7. Ensure Both Operands are Numbers - In JS the concatenation operator is also used for mathematical additions. This means that if one operand is an empty string we can unintentionally concatenate rather than sum our arguments.  Anytime you intend to add, ensure that both operands are numbers.

8. Convert Floating Points - floating point arithmetic is prone to bugs but is a necessity in the IEEE standard for binary floating point arithmetic. It is a good standard, suited to many applications, but we must remember to scale these numbers when we need accuracy. When dealing with currency we can therefore multiply our values by `100`, we can then accurately sum our values prior to converting them back by dividing by `100`.

9. Use `isFinite` - We often need to determine if an operation is `NaN`. We determined that `NaN` is a number, therefore it can be used in calculations, however, any output of a calculation involving `NaN` will also be `NaN`. We cannot use `typeof` as it will return `number` for `NaN`, `NaN` is also not equal to itself. We can use the `isNaN` function to determine if our value is `NaN`, however, it is better to use `isFinite` to determine whether a value is usable as a number because it not only rejects `NaN` but also rejects `infinity`. You may want to still check if the value is a number however as if the operand is not a number `isFinite` will attempt to convert it to one.

10. Don't Change Global Values - There are a number of predetermined `falsy` values in JS. These are global variables but they are not constants, hence, they can have their values changed. It should need no explanation why this is a bad idea. Do not change these values.

11. Test For Membership with `hasOwnProperty` - In some cases you will find that you need to loop over objects to perform some task. In a C-like language we could simply iterate over the values and conduct our operations until we reach the end. In JS however, Objects are never truly empty due to the prototype chain, therefore, we may run into unexpected results especially when combined with the concatenation behaviour when using the `+` operand on strings. We can use `hasOwnProperty` to check for membership ensuring that we have a property before we perform our operations.

12. Avoid Evil Operands `==` and `!=` - In JS we have the operands `===` and `!==`, you may know these as exact equality operators. You may also have seen the evil twins mentioned above. These effectively do the same thing, that is, when the operands are of the same `type`. However, if the types are not the same they attempt to `coerce` the values, this can be complicated and unmemorable, thus we should simply avoid using them.

13. Avoid `with` Statement - The `with` statement was originally intended as a shorthand for accessing Object properties. Avoid it, the results are often unpredictable, it is known to vary not only between runnings of the program but within a single instance of a running program itself. Simply its existence in the language significantly slows down JS. Avoid the `with` statement.

14. `Eval` is `evil` - `Eval` can be used to pass code to the JS compiler for execution. It is misused, hard to read, slower to execute due to it's need to run the `compiler`, it compromises security due to the amount of authority it grants. Need I say more? `Eval` is pure `evil`, avoid it.

15. Don't Pass Strings to `setTimeout` and `setInterval` - When using these functions with a string argument they run as an alternate form of `eval`. As we just determined, `eval` is `evil`. Don't pass strings to `setTimeout` or `setInterval`.

16. Don't use `Continue` - While it may be useful when writing `Assembly` you are better off without it. Due to it's jumping back to the top of a loop it makes our code smell. It can be difficult to follow, hard to read, and just bad practice. Don't use `continue`.

17. Avoid Intentional Fallthroughs - Whilst I am not entirely sold on this myself, I have used these fairly recently, I can see why others dislike them. Whilst there is nothing immediately obviously bad about using intentional fallthroughs in `switch` statements, it can make debugging more difficult if you end up with `unintentional` fallthroughs i.e. fallthroughs caused by a missing `break` or `return`. `Douglas Crackford` would say that the worst features are not the ones which are obviously dangerous, but the ones which are an attractive nuisance, those which are both useful and dangerous. In this case, we like the `fallthrough` because it is compact, but it is also a danger for creating hard to spot code smells. I have come to the conclusion that these are likely better to avoid entirely, however, if you must use them, determine some strict rules for their use. For example, have a rule that when a fallthrough is used every other statement MUST have a return unless it is falling to the default or determine that a `break` must always occur within each statement. These rules can make it easier to detect unintentional fallthroughs, though they are not foolproof.

18. Keep Blocks Consistent - BlockLess statements are another `evil` in JS. They are often used by `python` buffs or those coming from languages which lack the use of `curlys` for determining project structure. However, in JS these cannot be relied on, programs can run unpredictably and blocks may not end or start where you expect when using blockless statements. `Blocks` make it easier to get your structure right, they have a clear beginning and end, and we can trace them in our code editor by seeing the curly pairs. At te very least keep your use of blocks consistent, but I would recommend never using blockless statements at all.

19. Avoid shorthand `++/--` operators - These operators can be too cryptic. We can instead be more explicit reducing bugs and creating a cleaner coding style. Yes, it means writing a few more characters, but, when you consider the fact that these two operators are often the cause of `buffer overrun` bugs which cause serious security vulnerabilities it is worth the trade off to move forward without them. 